Give up preconceived ideas of what cures cancer and what doesn’t. Alkaline diet does not prevent or treat cancer.
Recognize it has been known for over 100 years that diet controls cancer.
Three types of diets have been shown to control cancer: calorie restricted (fasting), lowcarbohydrate (limit bread, rice, pasta, sugars) and ketogenic (high fat, high protein, no sugar or carbohydrates).
Modern oncology recognizes cancer cells burn sugar for energy as evidenced by PET scans that determine the size and location of tumors by their ability to take up radioactive sugar.
Sugar, largely derived from the liver as glucose and sucrose and fructose from the diet comprise most of the sugar used to fuel tumor cells.
Limited intake of dietary sugar is a potent way of controlling the growth of cancer.
Metformin, an anti-diabetic drug, reduces the amount of glucose produced in the liver, reduces the size and growth of tumors and also reduces cancer mortality.
There are natural alternatives that are far stronger than metformin but go overlooked. Patients have direct access to them without prescription. Resveratrol, known as a red wine molecule, is one of those molecules.
The signal that cells are oxygen-deprived (hypoxic) triggers healthy cells to convert from using oxygen to utilization of sugar for cell energy is called hypoxia-inducing factor-1 or HIF-1. There are natural molecules that block HIF-1 and therefore blunt the conversion of cells to utilize sugar instead of oxygen for energy. The inhibition of HIF-1 would also diminish the invasive outcropping of new blood vessels that facilitates nutrient delivery to the tumor cell and is destructive to tissues in the eyes, kidneys and other organs.
Combination therapies are considered best (i.e. diets + drugs and/or nutraceuticals).
Unless cancer patients can overcome their fears and learn to make independent health decisions, nothing will likely change in cancer care. Otherwise the “slash, burn and poison” paradigm will continue in oncology. Doctors will continue to make health decisions for patients with their own interests being paramount.

from We Already Know How to Cure Cancer Kindle Edition
by Bill Sardi
